## Formulas
In this section we will introduce logical formulas. A logical formula is a
mathematical statement that partitions a set into two parts:
Those elements that *satisfy* the formula and those that do not.

Let's say that we want to write a logical formula that describes legal
configurations of a single integer variable $x \in \mathbb{Z}$.
One example is that we could restrict $x$ to be less than $3$. We would write
this formula as follows:
$$x < 3$$
We can visually represent simple formulas like this one using a number line:
$$
\centering
\begin{tikzpicture}
\draw[latex-latex] (-1.5,0) -- (5.5,0) ; %edit here for the axis
\foreach \x in  {-1,0,1,2,3,4,5} % edit here for the vertical lines
\draw[shift={(\x,0)},color=black] (0pt,3pt) -- (0pt,-3pt);
\foreach \x in  {-1,0,1,2,3,4,5} % edit here for the vertical lines
\draw[shift={(\x,0)},color=black] (0pt,0pt) -- (0pt,-3pt) node[below] 
{$\x$};
\draw[-o] (-1.42,0) -- (3.08,0);
\draw[very thick] (-1.42,0) -- (2.92,0);
\end{tikzpicture}
$$
Notice that in this example, the number line has been broken into two pieces:
The piece that is bold and the piece that is not. Every formula partitions
the set in question into two subsets. In this case it is the set of all integers
less than $3$ and the set of all integers greater than or equal to $3$.

### Operations on Formulas
Like with sets, we have ways of putting various formulas together. If we want
to express the idea that two formulas must hold simultaneously, we use the
logical *and* operator, written $\wedge$.
And if we want to express the idea that either of two formulas can hold, we use
the logical *or* operator, written $\vee$.
Here's an example formula using the *and* operator:
$$x < 3 \wedge x \geq 0$$
$$
\centering
\begin{tikzpicture}
\draw[latex-latex] (-1.5,0) -- (5.5,0) ; %edit here for the axis
\foreach \x in  {-1,0,1,2,3,4,5} % edit here for the vertical lines
\draw[shift={(\x,0)},color=black] (0pt,3pt) -- (0pt,-3pt);
\foreach \x in  {-1,0,1,2,3,4,5} % edit here for the vertical lines
\draw[shift={(\x,0)},color=black] (0pt,0pt) -- (0pt,-3pt) node[below] 
{$\x$};
\draw[*-o] (-0.08,0) -- (3.08,0);
\draw[very thick] (0.08,0) -- (2.92,0);
\end{tikzpicture}
$$
This formula highlights the subset of integers $\{0, 1, 2\}$. We say that any
value in this set *satisfies* this formula, since the formula is true for each
value.
Again, this formula forms a partition because it also distinguishes that all
other integers do not satisfy it.
We have an operator which allows us to take advantage of this duality. The
logical *not* operator, written $\neg$ flips the partition to highlight the
opposite portion of the set.
In our current example:
$$\neg (x < 3 \wedge x \geq 0) \iff x \geq 3 \vee x < 0$$
$$
\centering
\begin{tikzpicture}
\draw[latex-latex] (-1.5,0) -- (5.5,0) ; %edit here for the axis
\foreach \x in  {-1,0,1,2,3,4,5} % edit here for the vertical lines
\draw[shift={(\x,0)},color=black] (0pt,3pt) -- (0pt,-3pt);
\foreach \x in  {-1,0,1,2,3,4,5} % edit here for the vertical lines
\draw[shift={(\x,0)},color=black] (0pt,0pt) -- (0pt,-3pt) node[below] 
{$\x$};
\draw[-o] (-1.42,0) -- (0.08,0);
\draw[very thick] (-1.42,0) -- (-0.08,0);
\draw[*-] (2.92,0) -- (5.42,0);
\draw[very thick] (2.92,0) -- (5.42,0);
\end{tikzpicture}
$$
(The symbol $\iff$ is read "if and only if". Its usage says that two formulas
are the same.)
Note the duality in the two number lines above. If they were put back together,
they would form the entire number line.

## Notable Formulas
Not all formulas have *inhabitants* (or satisfying elements). For example,
there is no value for $x$ such that $x < 3 \wedge x \geq 3$. In such cases, we
say that the formula is *vacuous*.
The most notable formula which is vacuous is the *False* formula, which we
write $\bot$. $\bot$ is uninhabited *by definition*. If you are comparing back
to things we claimed about sets, $\bot$ behaves very much like $\varnothing$.

However, $\bot$ has an interesting counterpart whereas $\varnothing$ does not.
Recall that we are defining a formula to be mathematical equation which
partitions a set. One possible partition puts all of the elements into one
subset. We call such a partition the formula *True*, written $\top$. Every
value in the reference set inhabits $\top$ *by definition*. Another way of
saying this is that if we want to demonstrate that a particular value inhabits
$\top$, the proof is trivial: Every value in the set inhabits $\top$.

> **Some Formula Laws**:
> Many of the set laws we stated last time translate directly to laws
> for formulas. We rewrite those here:
> $$\forall x. x \vee \bot \iff x$$
> $$\forall x. x \wedge \bot \iff \bot$$
> $$\forall x y. x \vee y \iff y \vee x$$
> $$\forall x y. x \wedge y \iff y \wedge x$$
> There are interesting explanations for some of these laws. The first law
> roughly states that demonstrating that a value inhabits the formula $x$ or
> inhabits the vacuous formula is the same as demonstrating that it inhabits
> the formula $x$. The reason that this is the case is that demonstrating a
> value inhabits the vacuous formula is impossible (by definition), and so the
> only possible way a value can satisfy the full formula is by satisfying $x$.
> The second law expresses a dual concept. It states that demonstrating that a
> value inhabits both some formula $x$ and the vacuous formula is the same as
> demonstrating that it inhabits the vacuous formula. A rough reasoning for
> this is that since it is *already impossible* to demonstrate that a value
> inhabits the vacuous formula, demonstrating both simultaneously isn't any
> harder (since it is equally as impossible).
>
> We also have $\top$, which has no suitable counterpart in sets.
> We can state some interesting laws about $\top$ as well.
> First, as you may have noticed, $\top$ and $\bot$ are dual concepts:
> $$\top \iff \neg \bot$$
> $$\bot \iff \neg \top$$
> In plain English, the subset that contains all elements in the set is the
> same as the opposite of the subset that contains no elements. And the subset
> that contains no elements is the same as the opposite of the subset that
> contains every element.
> Second, there are dual laws to the $\bot$ laws:
> $$\forall x. x \vee \top \iff \top$$
> $$\forall x. x \wedge \top \iff x$$
> These have similar interesting explanations to the $\bot$ laws above. The
> first law here roughly states that since demonstrating a value inhabits
> $\top$, it is also trivial to demonstrate a value inhabits $x \vee \top$:
> Just choose to demonstrate it inhabits $\top$ and you are done.
> And the second law says that demonstrating $x$ is exactly the same as
> demonstrating $x$ *and* $\top$, because $\top$ is demonstrated trivially.
>
> We're also ready to say a few interesting things about the logical *not*
> operator. First, we've already seen that $x < 3 \wedge x \geq 3$ is
> uninhabited. This is a specific instance of a more general truth:
> $$\forall x. x \wedge \neg x \iff \bot$$
> There is a dual concept which relates to the observation we made about
> putting number lines back together to form the full number line:
> $$\forall x. x \vee \neg x \iff \top$$
> Finally, if we negate twice, we get back to our original formula:
> $$\forall x. \neg (\neg x) \iff x$$
> There are more interesting laws we can already state about formulas (and
> about sets), but we will refrain for now.

> **A Note on the Absence of $\top$ for Sets**:
> We have stated that general sets do not have a corresponding notion to $\top$.
> But why should this be the case? It seems plausible that there could be a set
> which includes every possible conceivable element, as a dual to the set which
> has no elements ($\varnothing$). However it turns out allowing for such a set
> leads to a mathematical contradiction: You can use the existence of such a
> thing to prove whatever mathematical claim you like, even if the claim is
> absurd. This fact was published in 1901 by Bertrand Russell and hence is
> known as *Russell's Paradox*.
